https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guide.html

#Read modification order

    Unconditional base removal with --cut
    Quality trimming (-q)
    Adapter trimming (-a, -b, -g and uppercase versions)
    N-end trimming (--trim-n)
    Length tag modification (--length-tag)
    Read name suffixe removal (--strip-suffix)
    Addition of prefix and suffix to read name (-x/--prefix and -y/--suffix)
    Double-encode the sequence (only colorspace)
    Replace negative quality values with zero (zero capping, only colorspace)
    Trim primer base (only colorspace)
    #The last three steps are colorspace-specific.

#Quality trimming
cutadapt -q 15,10 -o output.fastq input.fastq

#Filtering reads
 
--minimum-length N or -m N
    Throw away processed reads shorter than N bases.
--too-short-output FILE
    Instead of throwing away the reads that are too short according to -m, write them to FILE (in FASTA/FASTQ format).
--maximum-length N or -M N
    Throw away processed reads longer than N bases.
--too-long-output FILE
    Instead of throwing away the reads that are too long (according to -M), write them to FILE (in FASTA/FASTQ format).
--untrimmed-output FILE
    Write all reads without adapters to FILE (in FASTA/FASTQ format) instead of writing them to the regular output file.
--discard-trimmed
    Throw away reads in which an adapter was found.
--discard-untrimmed
    Throw away reads in which no adapter was found. This has the same effect as specifying --untrimmed-output /dev/null.

   The options --too-short-output and --too-long-output are applied first. This means, for example, that a read that is too long will never end up in the --untrimmed-output file when --too-long-output was given, no matter whether it was trimmed or not.
   The options --untrimmed-output, --discard-trimmed and -discard-untrimmed are mutually exclusive.

#Dealing with N bases
--max-n COUNT
    Discard reads containing more than COUNT N bases. A fractional COUNT between 0 and 1 can also be given and will be treated as the proportion of maximally allowed N bases in the read.
--trim-n
    Remove flanking N bases from each read.


#Standard input and output
cutadapt -a AACCGGTT input.fastq > output.fastq
#Compressed files
cutadapt -a AACCGGTT -o output.fastq.gz input.fastq.gz

#Cutadapt supports trimming of multiple types of adapters:
Adapter type 	Command-line option
3’ adapter 	-a ADAPTER
5’ adapter 	-g ADAPTER
Anchored 3’ adapter 	-a ADAPTER$
Anchored 5’ adapter 	-g ^ADAPTER
5’ or 3’ (both possible) 	-b ADAPTER
Linked adapter 	-a ADAPTER1...ADAPTER2



